\section{Introduction}
\label{sec:introduction}

\lee{also mention in contributions that we've worked on edsl usability?}

In 2014, we published an experience report describing our approach to building
high-assurance embedded systems, particularly focused on the use of
EDSLs~\cite{smaccm}. In that paper, we briefly introduced a language called
\emph{Ivory} for programming high-assurance embedded systems. While we briefly
discussed our user experience of Ivory there, our main application with the
language has been to write \emph{SMACCMPilot}, a full-featured high-assurance
autopilot for a small unpiloted air vehicle. Here we describe the design and
implementation of the language itself.

Ivory follows in the footsteps of other ``safe C'' programming languages, like
Cyclone~\cite{cyclone} and Rust~\cite{rust}. By safe C languages, we mean
languages that avoid many of the pitfalls of C, particularly related to memory
safety and undefined behavior, that are suitable for writing low-level code
(e.g., device drivers), and that provide low-level control over timing behavior
and memory usage. Ivory, like other safe C languages, has a minimal runtime
system.

\paragraph{Contributions}
In 2014, Stephanie Weirich gave a keynote address at the International
Conference on Functional Programming describing dependent programming using
recent type and language extensions of GHC's implementation of Haskell (which we
will colloquially refer to as ``GHC'' in the remainder of this
paper)~\cite{weirich-keynote}. Weirich describes how recent extensions to GHC
provide much of the power of dependently-typed programming, such as found in
Agda~\cite{agda}, Idris~\cite{idris}, or Coq~\cite{coq}. However, in GHC, a surprisingly
powerful subset of dependent typing features can be used while still enjoying
type-inference and decidable type-checking~\cite{dephaskell}.

Ivory exemplifies the use of GHC dependent types in a large, fully-featured
EDSL. A contribution of the language is demonstrating that type checking for
safe programming involving the use of pointers, arrays, loops and local memory
allocation, can be embedded into GHC's type system. Indeed, Ivory's type system
goes beyond mere safety and tracks effects, such as memory allocation and
control flow operators (e.g., \cd{break} and \cd{return} statements).

After providing a brief introduction to the Ivory language in
Section~\ref{sec:ivory-overview}, we describe Ivory's embedding in GHC's type
system in Section~\ref{sec:ivory-embedding}, obviating the need for a writing a
custom type-checker or compiler for a safe C language.

Embedding a type system for a safe C language into GHC's type system is tricky
business. To gain confidence that our embedding is correct, we have formalized a
model of Ivory in the Isabelle theorem prover~\cite{isabelle}, and used the model to
formally prove progress and preservation properties for Ivory. In the process,
we have discovered minor bugs in Ivory's type embedding in GHC as well as
generalizations to Ivory that still preserve safety. We describe the
formalization, proofs, and extensions in Section~\ref{sec:semantics}.

Ivory goes beyond ensuring memory safety, the focus on most other safe C
programming languages, and also provides automated support for preventing errors
that result from other undefined behaviors in C (e.g., division by zero, left
bit-shifts by a negative value, etc.) as well as support for checking
user-provided assertions. Toward this end, Ivory supports writing user-supplied
assertions and pre- and post-conditions on functions, and includes a built-in
symbolic simulator targeting an SMT solver (CVC4~\cite{cvc4}), as well as an
theorem-prover back-end targeting ACL2~\cite{acl2}. For automated testing, a
QuickCheck-like property-based test-case generator is integrated into
Ivory. These tools are described in Section~\ref{sec:tools}.

Ivory is open-source (BSD3 license) and available at \url{ivory-lang.org}. It is
a ``real'' language, with well over 100k lines of code written in it. In
addition to the SMACCMPilot autopilot written in Ivory, Boeing has implemented a
level-of-interoperability for Stanag~4586~\cite{stanag}, a unpiloted air vehicle
communications standard. We know of a few additional small projects by other
developers in Ivory, as well.
